Q1) What is DBMS ? Mention Advantages ?
Database Management System is a software for storing & retrieving user data , considering appropriate security measures. It consists of group of programs which manipulate the database.
Advantages :
1)Improved Data Sharing
2)Improved Data Security
3)Better Data Integration
4)Minimised Data Redundancy

Q2)What is Database ?
Database is a collection of related data stored in a computer system. It can be managed through a DBMS , a software used to managed data.

Q3)What is Database System ?
The database & DBMS along with the applications that are associated with them are referred to as a database system.

Q4)What is RDBMS ?
A Relational Database Management System is a database management system that is based on the relational model.
eg : MySQL , Oracle , IBM DB2 , Microsoft SQL Server

Q5)Types of Database Languages 
1)DDL(Data Definition Language) : It is used to define the database schema.
Create , Drop , Alter , Truncate 
2)DML(Data Manipulation Language) : It is used to access & manipulate data in a database.
Select , Insert , Update , Delete
3)DCL(Data Control Language) : Grant , Revoke
4)TCL(Transaction Control Language) : Commit , RollBack , Save point.

Q6)ACID Properties 
To ensure the consistency of the database before & after the transaction , certain properties are followed by all the transactions occurring in the system.
A - Atomicity : The entire transaction takes place at once or doesn't happen at all.
C - Consistency : The database must be consistent before & after the transaction.
I - Isolation : Multiple transaction occur independently without interference.
D - Durability : The changes of a successful transaction occur even if the system failure occurs.


Q7) Keys in DBMS 
Candidate Key - the minimal set of attributes which can uniquely identify a tuple.

Primary Key - is a candidate key that the database designer selects while designing the database.
Primary Key is Unique + Not Null

Alternate Key - the candidate keys that are left unused after implementing the primary key are called Alternate Key.

Foreign Key - It is an attribute or set of attributes that references to primary key of same table or another table.
It maintains referential integrity.

Composite Key - A primary key composed of multiple attributes & not just a single attribute is called as composite key.

Unique Key - It is unique for all records of the table.It is non-updatable . It may have a NULL value.

Q8) Types of relationship ?
1) 1 - 1 2) 1 - M  3) M - 1 4)M - N

Q9) Data Abstraction in DBMS , three levels of it.
Data Abstraction is a process of hiding irrelevant details from the end user. It helps in achieving data independence which is used to enhance the security of data.
1)External Schema => View Level
2)Conceptual Schema => Logical Level
3)Physical Schema => Physical Level

Q10)Indexing in DBMS 
Indexing is a way to optimise the performance of a database by minimising the number of disk accesses required when a query is processed.It is a data structure technique which is used to quickly locate  & access the data in a database.

Q11)What is Normalization ? Types of Normalization 
It is a technique to remove or reduce redundancy from a table.
Types :
  1NF 
* Table should not contain any multivalued attribute.
  2NF
* Table should be in 1NF 
* There should be no partial dependency in the table.

  3NF
* Table should be in 2NF
* There should be no transitive dependency in the table.

  BCNF(Boyce Codd Normal form)
* Table should be in 3NF
* LHS of each functional dependency should be a Candidate Key.

Q12) What is sharding ?
Sharding is a method of partitioning a large database into smaller data , also known as shards.
Sharding makes the database smaller , faster & much more easily manageable.
Sharding reduces the transaction cost of the database.

Q13) Difference between 2-tier & 3-tier ?
     2- tier                                 |             3-tier
2-tier architecture consists of 2 layers :   | 3-tier architecture consists of 3 layers:
client layer & Database                      | Client layer , Business layer & Data layer
It is less secured as client can communicate | It is secured as client is not allowed to communicate
with database directly.                      | with database directly.


Q14) Difference between Truncate & Delete Command
     Delete Command                        |      Truncate Command
It is a DML Command                        | It is a DDL Command
The delete command is used to delete       | Truncate Command is used to delete all the rows from a table.
specific rows                              |

where clause can be used with delete       | where clause cannot be used with Truncate command.
command in order to filter the records.    |


Q15) What are Joins?
To combine two or more tables based on a common field.
1)Natural Join(Inner Join)
2)Left(Outer Join)
3)Right(Outer Join)
4)Full(Outer) Join

 
