
Q1)What is the main purpose of an operating system? Discuss different types? 
- It is designed to make sure that a computer system performs well by managing 
its computational activities.
- It provides an environment for the development & execution of program.

Types:
1)Batch operating system
2)Multi-programmed operating system
3)Multi-tasking operating system
4)Real time operating system
5)Distributed operating system

Q2)What is a socket, kernel and monolithic kernel ? 
- Socket : is used to make connection between two applications. End point of the connection
are called socket.
-Kernel : is the core & most important part of a computer operating system which provides
basic services for all parts of the operating system.
-Monolithic kernel : is a kernel which includes all operating system code in a single
executable image.

Q3)Difference between process and program? Different types of process. 
- A program while executing is known as a process
1)operating system processes
2)user processes

Q4)Define virtual memory, thrashing, threads.
Virtual memory : is a very useful memory management technique which enables processes
to execute outside of memory.This technique is especially used when an executing program
cannot fit in the physical memory.

Thrashing : is a phenomenon in Virtual memory scheme when the processor spends most of 
its time in swapping pages rather than executing instruction.

Thread : is an execution unit .It consists of thread ID , program counter,register
set & a stack .The information like code segment, files, and data segment can be
shared by the different threads. It is a basic unit of CPU utilization.

Q5)What is a deadlock? Different conditions to achieve a deadlock. 
- Deadlock is a condition where two or more processes are waiting for each other to 
complete so that they can start.But this situation causes hang for both of them.
1)Mutual Exclusion:- at least one resource must be held in a non - sharable mode.
2)Hold & wait
3)No Preemption
4)Circular wait

Q6)What is fragmentation? Types of fragmentation. 
- fragmentation is a phenomenon of memory wastage.It reduces the capacity & performance
because space is used inefficiently.
1)Internal fragmentation : it occurred when we deal with the systems that have fixed size 
allocation unit.
2)External fragmentation : it occurred when we deal with the systems that have variable 
size allocation unit.

Q7)What is spooling ? 
-Spooling is a process in which data is temporarily gathered to be used & executed by the 
system .It is associated with printing , when different applications send output to the 
printer at the same time , spooling keeps these all jobs inside a disk file & queue them 
accordingly to the printer.

Q8)What is semaphore and mutex (Differences might be asked)? Define Binary semaphore. 
- Semaphore is a protected variable or abstract data type that is used to lock the resource
being used.The value of the semaphore indicates the status of a common resource.
1)Counting semaphore 
2)Binary semaphore

- Binary semaphore : takes only 0 & 1 as value and used to implement mutual exclusion 
& synchronize concurrent process.

Q9)Starving and Aging in OS
- Starving : is a resource management problem .In this problem a waiting process does not 
get the resource it need for a long time because the resources are being allocated to other 
processes.
- Aging : is a technique used to avoid the starvation in resource scheduling system.

Q10)Why does Thrashing occur? 
- High degree of multiprogramming(if number of processes keeps on increasing in the memory) , 
lack of frames(if a process is allocated too few frames, then there will be too many and
too frequent page faults.) causes Thrashing.

Q11)What is paging and why do we need it? 
- Paging is a memory management scheme that eliminates the need for contiguous allocation
of physical memory.This scheme permits the physical address space of a process to be 
non-contiguous.
Paging is used to solve the external fragmentation problem in operating system.

Q12)Demand Paging, Segmentation 
- Demand Paging : specifies that if an area of memory is not currently being used,it is 
swapped to disk to make room for an applications need.

-Segmentation : is a memory management scheme that eliminates the need for contiguous allocation
of physical memory.This scheme permits the physical address space of a process to be 
non-contiguous. Segmentation technique divides process into segments . Each segment contains same type of function

Q13)Real Time Operating System, types of RTOS. 
- Real time Operating System is used in the case when rigid - time requirement have been 
placed on the operation of a processor.It contains a well defined & fixed time constraints.
1)Hard Real time Operating System
2)Soft Real time Operating System

Q14)Difference between main memory and secondary memory. 
 -      Main Memory               |     secondary Memory
 1)Main Memory is directly        |  secondary memory is not directly accessible by the 
 accessible by CPU                |   CPU.
2)RAM - volatile in nature        |
  ROM - Non volatile in nature    |   It's always non-volatile in nature
eg: RAM ,ROM,Cache memory,register|   eg: Hard disk , floppy disk , magnetic tapes 

Q15)FCFS Scheduling :
-First Come first served
-It is a type of Scheduling algorithm.
-In this scheme if a process request the CPU first , it is allocated to the CPU first.Its 
implementation is managed by a FIFO queue.
-Non Preemptive
Q16)SJF Scheduling :
-Shortest Job first
-It is a type of Scheduling algorithm.
-In this scheme the process requesting CPU for a shorter amount time is allocated to the CPU 
first.
-Non Preemptive
Q17)SRTF Scheduling: 
- Shortest Remaining time first 
- It is a type of Scheduling algorithm.
- At the arrival of every process, the short term scheduler schedules the process 
with the least remaining burst time among the list of available processes and the
running process.
- Preemptive 

Q18)LRTF Scheduling 
- Longest remaining time first
- It is a type of Scheduling algorithm.
- At the arrival of every process, the short term scheduler schedules the process 
with the max remaining burst time among the list of available processes and the
running process.
- Preemptive

Q19)Priority Scheduling 
- It is type of Scheduling algorithm.
- At the arrival of every process, the short term scheduler schedules the process
on the basis of the Priority among the list of available processes and the running process.
- Preemptive / Non -Preemptive

Q20)Round Robin Scheduling 
- Round Robin is a CPU Scheduling algorithm where each process is assigned a fixed time 
slot in a cyclic way.
-Starvation free as all the processes get fair share of CPU.
-Preemptive 
* The disadvantage of it is more overhead of context switching.

Q21)Banker’s Algorithm 
- It is one of the deadlock - avoidance method.
- It is also used in deadlock detection.

Q22)Explain Cache memory
- Cache memory is an extremely fast memory type that acts as a buffer between RAM & CPU.
The data of the main memory that are used frequently by CPU are stored in the cache memory
so that processor can easily access that data in a shorter time.
Whenever CPU needs to access memory it first check the cache memory , if the data is 
not found in cache memory , then the CPU moves into the main memory.

Q23)Diff between direct mapping and associative mapping 
     direct mapping               |   associative mapping
1)Need only one comparison        |  Need comparison with all tag bits.
because of using direct formula   |
to get the effective cache address| 

2)Main memory address is divided  | Main memory address is divided into 2 fields:
into 3 fields : Tag, Block & word |  Tag & word

3)There is one possible location  | The mapping of the main memory block can be done with
in the cache organization for each| any of the cache block.
block from main memory because    |
of the fixed formula.             |

4)Search time is less             | Search time is more

Q24)Diff between multitasking and multiprocessing 
     multitasking                |     multiprocessing
1)The execution of more than one | The availability of more than one processor per System
task simultaneously is known as  | that can execute several set of instruction in parallel 
multitasking.                    | is known as multiprocessing.
2)The number of CPU is one.      | The number of CPU is more than one.
3)Throughput is moderate.        | Throughput is maximum
4)Its efficiency is moderate     |  Its efficiency is maximum.

